README.md, before:

[![Build Status](https://github.com/dbs-leipzig/gdl/workflows/Java%20CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/dbs-leipzig/gdl/actions?workflow=Java+CI)

## Temporal-GDL - Temporal Graph Definition Language

> Now with bitemporal modeling of vertices and edges.

Inspired by the popular graph query language [Cypher](http://neo4j.com/docs/stable/cypher-query-lang.html),
which is implemented in [Neo4j](http://neo4j.com/), I started developing an [ANTLR](http://www.antlr.org/)
grammar to define property graphs. I added the concept of _logical graphs_ into the language to support multiple, 
possible overlapping property graphs in one database. 

GDL is used for unit testing and graph definition in [Gradoop](https://github.com/dbs-leipzig/gradoop), a framework for 
distributed temporal graph analytics.

The project contains the grammar and a listener implementation which transforms GDL scripts into
property graph model elements (i.e. graphs, vertices and edges).

## Data model

The data model adapts concepts from the _Temporal Property Graph Model (TPGM)_ and contains three 
elements: graphs, vertices and edges. Any element has an optional
label and can have multiple attributes in the form of key-value pairs. Vertices and edges may 
be contained in an arbitrary number of graphs including zero graphs. Edges are binary and directed.
Each graph element is associated with 2 intervals, transaction- (tx) and valid-time (val) interval,
to achieve a bitemporal modeling.
Each interval is defined by its start (from) and end (to) timestamp. Thus, vertices and edges have
four additional timestamps (tx_from, tx_to, val_from, val_to).

## Language Examples

Define a vertex:

```
()
```

Define a vertex and assign it to variable `alice`:

```
(alice)
```

Define a vertex with label `User`:

```
(:User)
```

Define a vertex with label `User`, assign it to variable `alice` and give it some properties:

```
(alice:User {name : "Alice", age : 23})
```

Property values can also be null:

```
(alice:User {name : "Alice", age : 23, city : NULL})
```

Numeric property values can have specific data types:

```
(alice:User {name : "Alice", age : 23L, height : 1.82f, weight : 42.7d})
```

Property values can also be ordered lists:

```
(alice:User {name : "Alice", age : 23, codes: ["Java", "Rust", "Scala"]})
```

Define an outgoing edge:

```
(alice)-->()
```

Define an incoming edge:

```
(alice)<--()
```

Define an edge with label `knows`, assign it to variable `e1` and give it some properties:

```
(alice)-[e1:knows {since : 2014}]->(bob)
```

Define multiple outgoing edges from the same source vertex (i.e. `alice`):

```
(alice)-[e1:knows {since : 2014}]->(bob)
(alice)-[e2:knows {since : 2013}]->(eve)
```

Define paths (four vertices and three edges are created):

```
()-->()<--()-->()
```

Define a graph with one vertex (graphs can be empty):

```
[()]
```

Define a graph and assign it to variable `g`:

```
g[()]
```

Define a graph with label `Community`:

```
:Community[()]
```

Define a graph with label `Community`, assign it to variable `g` and give it some properties:

```
g:Community {title : "Graphs", memberCount : 42}[()]
```

Define mixed path and graph statements (elements in the paths don't belong to a specific graph):

```
()-->()<--()-->()
[()]
```

Define a fragmented graph with variable reuse:

```
g[(a)-->()]
g[(a)-->(b)]
g[(b)-->(c)]
```

Define three graphs with overlapping vertex sets (e.g. `alice` is in `g1` and `g2`):

```
g1:Community {title : "Graphs", memberCount : 23}[
    (alice:User)
    (bob:User)
    (eve:User)
]
g2:Community {title : "Databases", memberCount : 42}[
    (alice)
]
g2:Community {title : "Hadoop", memberCount : 31}[
    (bob)
    (eve)
]
```

Define three graphs with overlapping vertex and edge sets (`e` is in `g1` and `g2`):

```
g1:Community {title : "Graphs", memberCount : 23}[
    (alice:User)-[:knows]->(bob:User),
    (bob)-[e:knows]->(eve:User),
    (eve)
]
g2:Community {title : "Databases", memberCount : 42}[
    (alice)
]
g2:Community {title : "Hadoop", memberCount : 31}[
    (bob)-[e]->(eve)
]
```

## Query Expressions

As part of his thesis, [Max](https://github.com/DarthMax) extended the grammar to support `MATCH .. WHERE ..`
statements analogous to Cypher. Besides defining a graph it is now also possible to formulate a query including 
patterns, variable length paths and predicates:

```
MATCH (alice:Person)-[:knows]->(bob:Person)-[:knows*2..2]->(eve:Person)
WHERE (alice.name = "Alice" AND bob.name = "Bob") 
OR (alice.age > bob.age)
OR (alice.age > eve.age)
```

**Note** that queries always start with the `MATCH` keyword optionally followed by one or more
`WHERE` clauses. 

### Bitemporal extensions for querying a TPGM graph

Several GDL extensions were added to support TPGM graphs as defined by 
[Rost et al.](https://dbs.uni-leipzig.de/de/publication/title/temporal_graph_analysis_using_gradoop). 
Here, valid and transaction intervals are defined for every graph element.

#### Timestamps
###### From/To Selectors
Every graph element (vertex/edge) is associated with 2 intervals, transaction (tx) and valid (val) interval.
Each interval is defined by its start (from) and end (to) timestamp.

For a graph element with variable name `a`, these four timestamps can be accessed in a property selector-like syntax:
* `a.tx_from`
* `a.tx_to`
* `a.val_from`
* `a.val_to`

Furthermore, the "global" transaction and valid interval are defined as the intersections of all elements' transaction/valid intervals. Their from and to stamps can be accessed by omitting the variable name:
* `tx_from`
* `tx_to`
* `val_from`
* `val_to`

###### Literals
Timestamp literals can be created in the following formats:
* `Timestamp(YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS)` where `T` stands for the literal `T`
* `Timestamp(YYYY-MM-DD)` (time is set to 00:00:00)
* `Timestamp(Now)` (current timestamp)

###### Min/Max
Two types of "complex" timestamps can be created from a set of simple ones (selectors and literals):
* `MIN(t1,t2,...,tn)`
* `MAX(t1,t2,...,tn)`

Note that they can not be nested further, only selectors and literals are valid arguments for `MIN` and `MAX`.

#### Relations between Timestamps
###### Simple Comparisons
Timestamps can be compared using the usual comparators `<`, `<=`, `=`, `!=`, `>=`, and `>`
###### Syntactic Sugar
* `t1.before(t2)`: equal to `t1 < t2`
* `t1.after(t2)`: equal to `t1 > t2`

#### Intervals
###### Selectors for Transaction/Valid Intervals
For a graph element with variable name `a`, the two intervals can be accessed in a property selector-like syntax:
* `a.tx`
* `a.val`

Furthermore, the _global_ transaction and valid interval are defined as the intersections of all elements' transaction/valid intervals. These intervals can be accessed by omitting the variable name:
* `tx`
* `val`

###### Interval Literals
Custom intervals can be created from two timestamps denoting start and end of the interval:
* `Interval(t1,t2)` where `t1` and `t2` are timestamps

When such an interval is created, a constraint `t1 <= t2` is implicitly added.

###### Merge
Two intervals can be merged, i.e. intersected. This yields a new interval. The merge operation is only defined, if the two intervals overlap.
* `i1.merge(i2)` where `i1` and `i2` are intervals. Implicitly, constraints to ensure that `i1` and `i2` overlap are added.

###### Join
Two intervals can be merged, i.e. united. This yields a new interval. The join operation is only defined, if the two intervals overlap.
* `i1.join(i2)` where `i1` and `i2` are intervals. Implicitly, constraints to ensure that `i1` and `i2` overlap are added.

Note that `merge` and `join` operations can not be nested any further, i.e. something like `i1.merge(i2).join(a.tx)` is not possible.

#### Relations between Intervals
Binary relations between intervals can be stated. They are inspired by the interval relations [defined in SQL:2011](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/2380776.2380786).
* `i1.overlaps(i2)`
* `i1.contains(i2)`
* `i1.precedes(i2)`
* `i1.succeeds(i2)`
* `i1.immediatelyPrecedes(i2)`
* `i1.immediatelySucceeds(i2)`
* `i1.equals(i2)`

These relations are syntactic sugar, as they can all be expressed as terms using only from and to selectors.

#### Relations between Intervals and Timestamps
Additionally, relations between an interval and one or two timestamps are possible. Here, `i` is an interval, `t`, `t1` and `t2` are timestamps:
* `i.fromTo(t1,t2)`
* `i.between(t1,t2)`
* `t.precedes(i)`
* `t.succeeds(i)`
* `i.contains(t)`

#### asOf
`asOf` is a special constraint that refers to the transaction interval of a graph element.
* `a.asOf(t)` is true iff `a.tx_from <= t` and `a.tx_to >= t`, where `a` refers to a graph element

#### Durations
###### Interval Durations
Durations of intervals can be referred to by simply referring to the interval, e.g. in the context of a duration predicate (see below) `a.tx` would denote the length of `a`'s transaction time.

###### Constant Durations
Duration constants can be created by the following keywords (`number` is an integer literal):
* `Millis(number)`
* `Seconds(number)`
* `Minutes(number)`
* `Hours(number)`
* `Days(number)`

#### Relations between Durations
Durations as defined above can be compared:
* `d1.longerThan(d2)`
* `d1.shorterThan(d2)`
* `d1.lengthAtLeast(d2)`
* `d1.lengthAtMost(d2)`

### Implementation Details
New temporal `ComparableExpression`s are added.

The processing of all the temporal constraints described above is encapsulated in a `GDLLoaderTemporal.java` that is used by the actual `GDLLoader`.

## Usage examples

Add dependency to your maven project:

```
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.github.s1ck</groupId>
    <artifactId>gdl</artifactId>
    <version>0.4.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
</dependency>
```

Create a database from a GDL string:

```java
GDLHandler handler = new GDLHandler.Builder().buildFromString("g[(alice)-[e1:knows {since : 2014}]->(bob)]");

for (Vertex v : handler.getVertices()) {
    // do something
}

// access elements by variable
Graph g = handler.getGraphCache().get("g");
Vertex alice = handler.getVertexCache().get("alice");
Edge e = handler.getEdgeCache().get("e1");
```

Read predicates from a Cypher query:

```java
GDLHandler handler = new GDLHandler.Builder().buildFromString("MATCH (a:Person)-[e:knows]->(b:Person) WHERE a.age > b.age");

// prints (((a.age > b.age AND a.__label__ = Person) AND b.__label__ = Person) AND e.__label__ = knows)
handler.getPredicates().ifPresent(System.out::println);
```

Create a database from an `InputStream` or an input file:

```java
GDLHandler handler1 = new GDLHandler.Builder().buildFromStream(stream);
GDLHandler handler2 = new GDLHandler.Builder().buildFromFile(fileName);
```

Append data to a given handler:

```java
GDLHandler handler = new GDLHandler.Builder().buildFromString("g[(alice)-[e1:knows {since : 2014}]->(bob)]");

handler.append("g[(alice)-[:knows]->(eve)]");
```

## License

Licensed under the [Apache License, Version 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).

Commit message:

Update wording in intro paragraph
It was weird to read the `I` form in the intro since this is a fork. I changed the `I` form to a more general `We` form and made it clear that this project is a fork including additional capabilites, such as temporal predicates. I hope that's alright with you guys. Happy to see that this is growing.

README.md, after:

[![Build Status](https://github.com/dbs-leipzig/gdl/workflows/Java%20CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/dbs-leipzig/gdl/actions?workflow=Java+CI)

## Temporal-GDL - Temporal Graph Definition Language

> Now with bitemporal modeling of vertices and edges.

This projected has been forked from [GDL](https://github.com/s1ck/gdl). 
GDL has initially been built for testing and pattern matching in [Gradoop](https://github.com/dbs-leipzig/gradoop), but it now used in several other projects.
Since GDL is intended to be general and aligned with the property graph model, we forked the project and extended the language with temporal aspects.

For more information on GDL, visit the [original project](https://github.com/s1ck/gdl).
The following description is an extended description of the language specification.

## Data model

The data model adapts concepts from the _Temporal Property Graph Model (TPGM)_ and contains three 
elements: graphs, vertices and edges. Any element has an optional
label and can have multiple attributes in the form of key-value pairs. Vertices and edges may 
be contained in an arbitrary number of graphs including zero graphs. Edges are binary and directed.
Each graph element is associated with 2 intervals, transaction- (tx) and valid-time (val) interval,
to achieve a bitemporal modeling.
Each interval is defined by its start (from) and end (to) timestamp. Thus, vertices and edges have
four additional timestamps (tx_from, tx_to, val_from, val_to).

## Language Examples

Define a vertex:

```
()
```

Define a vertex and assign it to variable `alice`:

```
(alice)
```

Define a vertex with label `User`:

```
(:User)
```

Define a vertex with label `User`, assign it to variable `alice` and give it some properties:

```
(alice:User {name : "Alice", age : 23})
```

Property values can also be null:

```
(alice:User {name : "Alice", age : 23, city : NULL})
```

Numeric property values can have specific data types:

```
(alice:User {name : "Alice", age : 23L, height : 1.82f, weight : 42.7d})
```

Property values can also be ordered lists:

```
(alice:User {name : "Alice", age : 23, codes: ["Java", "Rust", "Scala"]})
```

Define an outgoing edge:

```
(alice)-->()
```

Define an incoming edge:

```
(alice)<--()
```

Define an edge with label `knows`, assign it to variable `e1` and give it some properties:

```
(alice)-[e1:knows {since : 2014}]->(bob)
```

Define multiple outgoing edges from the same source vertex (i.e. `alice`):

```
(alice)-[e1:knows {since : 2014}]->(bob)
(alice)-[e2:knows {since : 2013}]->(eve)
```

Define paths (four vertices and three edges are created):

```
()-->()<--()-->()
```

Define a graph with one vertex (graphs can be empty):

```
[()]
```

Define a graph and assign it to variable `g`:

```
g[()]
```

Define a graph with label `Community`:

```
:Community[()]
```

Define a graph with label `Community`, assign it to variable `g` and give it some properties:

```
g:Community {title : "Graphs", memberCount : 42}[()]
```

Define mixed path and graph statements (elements in the paths don't belong to a specific graph):

```
()-->()<--()-->()
[()]
```

Define a fragmented graph with variable reuse:

```
g[(a)-->()]
g[(a)-->(b)]
g[(b)-->(c)]
```

Define three graphs with overlapping vertex sets (e.g. `alice` is in `g1` and `g2`):

```
g1:Community {title : "Graphs", memberCount : 23}[
    (alice:User)
    (bob:User)
    (eve:User)
]
g2:Community {title : "Databases", memberCount : 42}[
    (alice)
]
g2:Community {title : "Hadoop", memberCount : 31}[
    (bob)
    (eve)
]
```

Define three graphs with overlapping vertex and edge sets (`e` is in `g1` and `g2`):

```
g1:Community {title : "Graphs", memberCount : 23}[
    (alice:User)-[:knows]->(bob:User),
    (bob)-[e:knows]->(eve:User),
    (eve)
]
g2:Community {title : "Databases", memberCount : 42}[
    (alice)
]
g2:Community {title : "Hadoop", memberCount : 31}[
    (bob)-[e]->(eve)
]
```

## Query Expressions

As part of his thesis, [Max](https://github.com/DarthMax) extended the grammar to support `MATCH .. WHERE ..`
statements analogous to Cypher. Besides defining a graph it is now also possible to formulate a query including 
patterns, variable length paths and predicates:

```
MATCH (alice:Person)-[:knows]->(bob:Person)-[:knows*2..2]->(eve:Person)
WHERE (alice.name = "Alice" AND bob.name = "Bob") 
OR (alice.age > bob.age)
OR (alice.age > eve.age)
```

**Note** that queries always start with the `MATCH` keyword optionally followed by one or more
`WHERE` clauses. 

### Bitemporal extensions for querying a TPGM graph

Several GDL extensions were added to support TPGM graphs as defined by 
[Rost et al.](https://dbs.uni-leipzig.de/de/publication/title/temporal_graph_analysis_using_gradoop). 
Here, valid and transaction intervals are defined for every graph element.

#### Timestamps
###### From/To Selectors
Every graph element (vertex/edge) is associated with 2 intervals, transaction (tx) and valid (val) interval.
Each interval is defined by its start (from) and end (to) timestamp.

For a graph element with variable name `a`, these four timestamps can be accessed in a property selector-like syntax:
* `a.tx_from`
* `a.tx_to`
* `a.val_from`
* `a.val_to`

Furthermore, the "global" transaction and valid interval are defined as the intersections of all elements' transaction/valid intervals. Their from and to stamps can be accessed by omitting the variable name:
* `tx_from`
* `tx_to`
* `val_from`
* `val_to`

###### Literals
Timestamp literals can be created in the following formats:
* `Timestamp(YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS)` where `T` stands for the literal `T`
* `Timestamp(YYYY-MM-DD)` (time is set to 00:00:00)
* `Timestamp(Now)` (current timestamp)

###### Min/Max
Two types of "complex" timestamps can be created from a set of simple ones (selectors and literals):
* `MIN(t1,t2,...,tn)`
* `MAX(t1,t2,...,tn)`

Note that they can not be nested further, only selectors and literals are valid arguments for `MIN` and `MAX`.

#### Relations between Timestamps
###### Simple Comparisons
Timestamps can be compared using the usual comparators `<`, `<=`, `=`, `!=`, `>=`, and `>`
###### Syntactic Sugar
* `t1.before(t2)`: equal to `t1 < t2`
* `t1.after(t2)`: equal to `t1 > t2`

#### Intervals
###### Selectors for Transaction/Valid Intervals
For a graph element with variable name `a`, the two intervals can be accessed in a property selector-like syntax:
* `a.tx`
* `a.val`

Furthermore, the _global_ transaction and valid interval are defined as the intersections of all elements' transaction/valid intervals. These intervals can be accessed by omitting the variable name:
* `tx`
* `val`

###### Interval Literals
Custom intervals can be created from two timestamps denoting start and end of the interval:
* `Interval(t1,t2)` where `t1` and `t2` are timestamps

When such an interval is created, a constraint `t1 <= t2` is implicitly added.

###### Merge
Two intervals can be merged, i.e. intersected. This yields a new interval. The merge operation is only defined, if the two intervals overlap.
* `i1.merge(i2)` where `i1` and `i2` are intervals. Implicitly, constraints to ensure that `i1` and `i2` overlap are added.

###### Join
Two intervals can be merged, i.e. united. This yields a new interval. The join operation is only defined, if the two intervals overlap.
* `i1.join(i2)` where `i1` and `i2` are intervals. Implicitly, constraints to ensure that `i1` and `i2` overlap are added.

Note that `merge` and `join` operations can not be nested any further, i.e. something like `i1.merge(i2).join(a.tx)` is not possible.

#### Relations between Intervals
Binary relations between intervals can be stated. They are inspired by the interval relations [defined in SQL:2011](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/2380776.2380786).
* `i1.overlaps(i2)`
* `i1.contains(i2)`
* `i1.precedes(i2)`
* `i1.succeeds(i2)`
* `i1.immediatelyPrecedes(i2)`
* `i1.immediatelySucceeds(i2)`
* `i1.equals(i2)`

These relations are syntactic sugar, as they can all be expressed as terms using only from and to selectors.

#### Relations between Intervals and Timestamps
Additionally, relations between an interval and one or two timestamps are possible. Here, `i` is an interval, `t`, `t1` and `t2` are timestamps:
* `i.fromTo(t1,t2)`
* `i.between(t1,t2)`
* `t.precedes(i)`
* `t.succeeds(i)`
* `i.contains(t)`

#### asOf
`asOf` is a special constraint that refers to the transaction interval of a graph element.
* `a.asOf(t)` is true iff `a.tx_from <= t` and `a.tx_to >= t`, where `a` refers to a graph element

#### Durations
###### Interval Durations
Durations of intervals can be referred to by simply referring to the interval, e.g. in the context of a duration predicate (see below) `a.tx` would denote the length of `a`'s transaction time.

###### Constant Durations
Duration constants can be created by the following keywords (`number` is an integer literal):
* `Millis(number)`
* `Seconds(number)`
* `Minutes(number)`
* `Hours(number)`
* `Days(number)`

#### Relations between Durations
Durations as defined above can be compared:
* `d1.longerThan(d2)`
* `d1.shorterThan(d2)`
* `d1.lengthAtLeast(d2)`
* `d1.lengthAtMost(d2)`

### Implementation Details
New temporal `ComparableExpression`s are added.

The processing of all the temporal constraints described above is encapsulated in a `GDLLoaderTemporal.java` that is used by the actual `GDLLoader`.

## Usage examples

Add dependency to your maven project:

```
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.github.s1ck</groupId>
    <artifactId>gdl</artifactId>
    <version>0.4.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
</dependency>
```

Create a database from a GDL string:

```java
GDLHandler handler = new GDLHandler.Builder().buildFromString("g[(alice)-[e1:knows {since : 2014}]->(bob)]");

for (Vertex v : handler.getVertices()) {
    // do something
}

// access elements by variable
Graph g = handler.getGraphCache().get("g");
Vertex alice = handler.getVertexCache().get("alice");
Edge e = handler.getEdgeCache().get("e1");
```

Read predicates from a Cypher query:

```java
GDLHandler handler = new GDLHandler.Builder().buildFromString("MATCH (a:Person)-[e:knows]->(b:Person) WHERE a.age > b.age");

// prints (((a.age > b.age AND a.__label__ = Person) AND b.__label__ = Person) AND e.__label__ = knows)
handler.getPredicates().ifPresent(System.out::println);
```

Create a database from an `InputStream` or an input file:

```java
GDLHandler handler1 = new GDLHandler.Builder().buildFromStream(stream);
GDLHandler handler2 = new GDLHandler.Builder().buildFromFile(fileName);
```

Append data to a given handler:

```java
GDLHandler handler = new GDLHandler.Builder().buildFromString("g[(alice)-[e1:knows {since : 2014}]->(bob)]");

handler.append("g[(alice)-[:knows]->(eve)]");
```

## License

Licensed under the [Apache License, Version 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).
